The theme of this month's program is, make wise decisions.
Now, discussion is based on Job 34 verse 11.
Let's read that together.
For he, Jehovah, will reward a man according to what he does
and bring upon him the consequences of his ways.
As highlighted in the scripture, our actions are very important.
And our actions are usually the result of decisions we make.
Some decisions are made after a lot of serious thought.
Others though are made very quickly.
But no matter how much thought goes into making a decision,
we need to recognize this basic fact.
Wise decisions bring positive rewards.
And wrong decisions can result in very negative consequences.
Of course, all of us want to make wise decisions,
but what are wise decisions?
Wise decisions are those that please our Heavenly Father, Jehovah.
Most of us have already made some very good decisions.
These include the big decisions in life such as
dedicating ourselves to Jehovah and getting baptized
and deciding not to become involved in the religious
and political disputes of this world.
No doubt before we made those major decisions,
we spend a lot of time praying about them and seeking Jehovah's direction.
And we have seen his blessing in our lives because of these right decisions.
In this program though, we won't be discussing such major decisions.
Rather, we'll focus on decisions that may be viewed by some as minor.
However, some of these can lead to very serious consequences.
First we'll consider a Bible example of a person who served Jehovah
and yet made some wrong decisions along the way.
We'll analyze what caused this faithful servant to make these wrong decisions.
Then we'll consider what we need to do in order to make wise decisions.
Finally, we'll consider what we need to do if we realize we've already made an unwise decision.
So to start, let's discuss a faithful servant of Jehovah
who made some unwise decisions.
The example we have in mind is that of King Jehosephat.
What was Jehovah's view of King Jehosephat?
Let's see the answer at 2 Chronicles chapter 17 and verses 3 and 4.
Jehovah continued with Jehosephat because he walked in the former ways of his forefather David
and did not search for the bails.
But he searched for the God of his father and followed his commandment
and not the practices of Israel.
That sounds like a wonderful commendation, doesn't it?
Yes, Jehosephat was a faithful King.
He made the wise decision to worship Jehovah.
But even so, he still made some very unwise decisions.
Let's read about one of those unwise decisions at 2 Chronicles chapter 18 and verse 1.
Jehosephat had riches and glory and abundance.
But he made a marriage alliance with Ahab.
Yes, he made his son marry Ahab's daughter, Atholah.
Now that was a very unwise decision.
Why?
Because Ahab had built a temple for bale and had even employed 850 false prophets.
Ahab was also married to wicked Queen Jezebel.
Who would want the child to marry into such a bad family?
What was Jehosephat thinking?
Why did he arrange for this marriage?
Perhaps he wanted to reunite the 12 tribes or he may have had some political and commercial motives
for wanting to have Ahab as an ally.
Even though we don't know for sure the reason, we do know there were consequences.
Because of this close relationship with Ahab, Jehosephat felt obligated to support Ahab in a war against the Sunians.
However, this led to yet another unwise decision.
As they were preparing for this battle, Jehosephat asked for direction from one of Jehovah's prophets.
Ahab though expressed his hatred for the prophet and after hearing the prophet's message had him thrown into prison.
At that point, it was decision time for Jehosephat.
What did he decide to do?
Although he initially disagreed with Ahab, he eventually joined him in the battle.
Jehosephat disregarded the warning from Jehovah.
But then this led him to still another unwise decision, this time an incredibly foolish decision.
What happened?
Jehovah's prophet had foretold that the Israelites would lose their shepherd or king in battle.
So Ahab said that he would disguise himself and not enter the battle dressed as a king.
He then said that Jehosephat should still dress like a king.
Now just think about that for a moment.
Ahab was basically saying,
you go out into the battle with a target on your back and all hide in disguise.
Really?
Jehosephat's decision to agree to do that was not only unwise but also foolish.
It nearly cost him his life.
So why would he do that?
Inside on the scripture says that perhaps Jehosephat didn't want to go back on his original promise to accompany Ahab.
So maybe he would have lost face if he backed out of the agreement at that point.
Although Jehosephat did survive the battle, Jehovah sent another prophet to him to say what's recorded at 2 Chronicles 19 verse 2.
Is it the wicked you should be helping and is it those who hate Jehovah you should love?
Because of this, the indignation of Jehovah is against you.
Although Jehovah acknowledged the good things that Jehosephat had accomplished in other aspects of his life,
Jehosephat clearly made some very unwise decisions.
What lessons do we learn from Jehosephat's wrong decisions?
Lesson 1. Just because we've done many good things in Jehosephat's service doesn't mean that we'll always make wise decisions.
Lesson 2. Making friendships with those who hate Jehosephat can put us under pressure to make other unwise decisions.
Lesson 3. Even though we may seek Jehosephat's direction,
we must follow it if we want to make wise decisions.
Lesson 4. If we realize that we've made an unwise decision, don't keep going in the same course. Stop and change direction.
These lessons can be summarized in the words of Proverbs 22 verse 3. There we told,
the shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself,
but the inexperience keeps right on going and suffer the consequences.
Yes, we need to see the possible consequences of wrong decisions and then take action to avoid them.
What were some of the consequences of Jehosephat's unwise decisions?
It nearly cost him his life. His oldest son died in apostate,
and later his daughter-in-law, Atholaya, killed all the heirs to the throne except one baby and set herself up as queen of Judah.
But you might be thinking, still Jehosephat viewed Jehosephat as a good king. Yes, he did.
And it's encouraging for us to know that even if we have made some unwise decisions,
it's possible that Jehosephat may still view us as his faithful servants.
Does that mean, then, that our decisions are not so important?
The Watchtower back in 1980 made this interesting comparison.
It used an illustration of two ship captains.
One skillfully maneuvered his ship through a storm, bringing the vessel and his crew safely to shore,
but the other captain made unwise decisions.
And because of that, he experienced shipwreck during the same storm, saving only his life.
While both captains escaped with their lives, the one whose ship remained intact would certainly enjoy greater happiness and honour, wouldn't he?
It's obvious which captain Jehosephat was like.
Unlike Jehosephat, surely we'd prefer to be like the successful captain, the one whose ship remained intact.
How can we make sure that we are like the successful captain?
Back in 2011, the April Watchtower had a special chart entitled Steps to Making Good Decisions.
It listed these steps in making wise decisions.
One, avoid being presumptuous.
Two, do research.
Three, pray for wisdom.
Four, make the decision.
Five, implement the decision.
But then there was an additional step.
Six, review and adjust.
Why is Step 6 listed?
Well, from time to time, we need to review decisions we've already made.
As we do so, perhaps we'll come to realise that some of them were not the best decisions.
Can you still be like the successful captain?
Yes, you can.
How?
If you courageously make the needed adjustments.
We must acknowledge that not all decisions work out exactly as we had planned.
As Ecclesiastes 9-11 reminds us, time and unexpected events overtake us all.
So what should we do if that's the case?
The same Watchtower in 2011 answers that question for us.
After saying that Jehovah expects us to live up to such decisions as our dedication and our marriage vows,
it went on to say,
most decisions, though, are less waiting.
A wise person will, from time to time, review the decisions he has made.
He will not let pride or stubbornness prevent him from adjusting or even reversing a decision.
His prime concern is to make sure that his life course continues to honor God.
Thinking back to the illustration of the two captains, at times they may need to reverse a former unwise decision.
That happened during a hurricane back in 1889.
The captain of the British ship Caliope was anchored in the harbor in Apia, Western Samoa, when a hurricane started blowing.
Initially, he decided like all the other captains in the harbor to weather the storm where he was.
But as the waves grew in height and the dangers increased, the captain realized he had made the wrong decision.
What did he do?
He courageously reversed his decision and headed out to open sea.
It was difficult, but ultimately he saved himself, his ship, and the 250 sailors on board.
This bold act of courage ended him into the annals of naval history.
To be like that courageous captain, at times we need to prayerfully reexamine our past decisions.
These could be decisions about our employment, entertainment, education, or even where we live.
When we made the original decisions, they may have seemed wise to us.
But do they still seem that way now?
If we see the dangerous winds of bad consequences and the frightening waves of disaster approaching,
because our decisions were not completely in harmony with Jehovah's will, what should we do?
Be like the wise captain.
Don't worry about losing face, be courageous, pray for Jehovah's help, and then take bold action.
Make the changes you need to make in order to continue to please Jehovah.
In this way, you'll make the wise decision.
The one that leads to success, the one that Jehovah will bless.